# CS 241 Note

--By Corvo Han

Processors/Machine Language/MIPS Architecture  

Embedded processors are done in HDL

OS handles:

1. Basic input/output
2. Allocating Storage and Memory
3. providing for protected sharing

Compilers perform another vital function: the translation of a program written in a high-level language, such as C, C++, Java, or Visual Basic into instructions that the hardware can execute.

We refer to each “letter” as a binary digit or bit. 

the pioneers invented programs to translate from symbolic notation to binary. The first of these programs was named an assembler. This program translates a symbolic version of an instruction into the binary version. For example, the programmer would write

add A,B

and the assembler would translate this notation into

1000110010100000

Assembler

A program that translates a symbolic version of instructions into the binary version.

for e.g

```
code in C:

swap(int v[],int k){
    int temp;
    temp = v[k];
    v[k]=v[k+1];
    v[k+1]=temp;
}

AL for MIPS:

swap:
    multi $2, $5, 4
    add $2, $4, $2
    lw $15, 0($2)
    lw $16, 4($2)
    sw $16, 0($2)
    sw $15, 4($2)
    jr $31

```
datapath:
The component of the processor that performs arithmetic operations

control:
The component of the processor that commands the datapath, memory, and I/O devices according to the instructions of the program.

Multiple DRAMs are used together to contain the   
instructions and data of a program. In contrast to   
sequential access memories, such as magnetic tapes, the  
RAM portion of the term DRAM means that memory accesses 
take basically the same amount of time no matter what \
portion of the memory is read.

One of the most important abstractions is the interface between the hardware and the lowest-level software. Because of its importance, it is given a special name: the instruction set architecture, or simply architecture, of a computer.

# Language

MIPS instruction

ARMv7 and v8 is similar

MIPS instructions:

data must be in register to perform arithmatics 

## instructions

$zero always equals 0, and $at is  revered by assembler 

Arithmatic : add $s1,$s2,$s3: $s1 = $s2+$s3 

there are 32 registers, 

$s0-s7, $t0-$t9 $zero, $a0-a3 $v0-v1 $gp, $fp, $sp, $ra, $at

2^30 memory words

Arithmatics:sub $s1,$s2,$s3: $s1 = $s2-$s3 

add immediate: used to add constants

addi $s1,$s2,20 = $s1 = $s2 + 20

the operand "#" is used as comments

for e.g add a,b,c,d

add a,b,c
add a,a,d
add a,a,e

C: f = (g + h) – (i + j);

MIPS:

add t0, g, h #temporary variable t0 contains g+h  
add t1,i,j
sub f,t0,t1


The size of a register in the MIPS architecture is 32 bits; groups of 32 bits occur so frequently that they are given the name word in the MIPS architecture.


 For now, we will use $s0, $s1,… for registers that correspond to variables in C and Java programs and $t0, $t1,… for temporary registers needed to compile the program into MIPS instructions.



f = (g + h) – (i + j);
The variables f, g, h, i, and j are assigned to the registers $s0, $s1, $s2, $s3, and $s4, respectively. What is the compiled MIPS code?


add $t0,$s1,$s2
add $t1,$s3,$s4
sub $s0,$t0,$t1



## Data Structures and Memory Operands

MIPS must include instructions that transfer data between memory and registers.

The data transfer instruction that copies data from memory to a register is traditionally called load.

The actual MIPS name for this instruction is lw, standing for load word.

practice:

```
 A is an array of 100 words and that the compiler has associated the variables g and h with the registers $s1 and $s2 as before. Let’s also assume that the starting address, or base address, of the array is in $s3.

 Calculate g = h + A[8];
 ```


lw $t0, 8($s3) //get A[8] in t0

add $s1,$2,$t0;

A[12] = h + A[8];

lw $t0,32($s3)

add $t0,$s2,$t0

sw $t0,48($s3)


addi $s3,$s3,4 



## Signed and Unsigned Numbers

